# CREATION

This story traces its roots back to ancient Netheril. It is a myth
recounting the epic battle between light and darkness, beginning with
Lord Ao, the Overgod to who all are subject to. This is the creation of
our universe, what inhabitants from other planes call the Prime
Material.

Lord Ao created our Realmspace from the raw material of the Phlogiston,
but it was filled by naught but the primordial essence, in a state of
chaos, shadow, and timeless nothingness. This misty realm of shadows
would later coalesce and form two beautiful twin goddesses, polar
opposites of each other, one dark and one light. Shar and Selûne, the
Mistress of the Night and the Moonmaiden. Seeing themselves as one
being, they were also known as the Two-Faced Goddess.

Together, they created a sea of silvery liquid left over from the
realm’s creation as their home, the Astral Sea. They also created the
heavenly bodies in Realmspace from the cosmic ether, what is known as
the Torillian system. In the same process they also formed the goddess
Chauntea, The Great Mother. She was believed to be the embodiment of the
world of Abeir-Toril. However, there was no fire or heat. Realmspace was
illuminated by the cool radiant face of Selûne and darkened by Shar.
Chauntea begged the Two-Faced Goddess for warmth. Then, for the first
time, Selûne and Shar were divided. Selûne wanted to gift her warmth so
that she could nurture life, but Shar did not wish for more life on the
worlds. Thus began the war of light and darkness, which spawned the
deities of war, disease, murder and death. Seizing an advantage, Selûne
reached out into the plane of fire and brought forth a fragment of
ever-living flame. She ignited a heavenly body – the Sun – in order to
give warmth to Chauntea.

This greatly enraged Shar, who began to blot out all light and warmth in
the universe. In a desperate attempt to protect all life, Selûne tore
out her own divine essence and hurled it at her sister. This tore
through Shar, bonding with some of Shar’s essence and pulling it loose.
This magical energy combined to form the goddess Mystryl, the Lady of
Mysteries, the original goddess of magic. Although she was composed of
both light and dark, she initially sided with Selûne and thus balanced
the conflict and mediated an uneasy truce. This cast Shar into darkness
for centuries. Consumed with bitterness and loneliness, she vowed
revenge, and the conflict between the two sisters would go on forever
more.

# The Dawn War

It's unclear whether this conflict broke out immediately, or if it was
initially a tentative peace. The primordials, beings of entropy and
destruction, became aware of the newly formed worlds and began to
restructure it, rearranging parts they found too bright or too dark.
From the bright they would create the plane of Faerie, or the Feywild.
From the dark they would create the plane of Shadow.

This angered the gods greatly, who decided to intervene in the unmaking.
This was a declaration of war. More gods were born from the conflict,
some summoned from outside of this universe, to aid the native gods in
their struggles.

The primordials were first unaware of the Astral Sea. But, from another
dying universe, a group of ancient demons predating even the gods, the
obyriths, wanted it for their own. They fashioned all their hatred and
hunger into a shard of pure evil that they used to pierce the veil
between universes.

A long-forgotten interloper deity hungry for power, named Tharizdun,
found and seized the shard. This linked him to the obyriths and their
universe, corrupting his mind in an instant, driving the deity to
madness. It whispered promises of total domination of the Astral Sea if
he were to plant the shard there, in exchange for his fealty. However,
Tharizdun recognized the might of the gods and decided to travel to the
farthest regions of the cosmos to plant it in some primordial expanse in
the Elemental Chaos, creating the Abyss.  
The surviving obyriths fled their dying reality to corrupt this new
universe. Expecting the Astral Sea, they entered the Elemental Chaos and
fought Tharizdun, who would rename himself the Elder Elemental Eye, and
several primordials, reaching a stalemate.

The obyriths plunged into the newly formed Abyss where a being named
Obox-Ob claimed the shard of evil and became the first Prince of Demons.
The shard of evil would transform the primordials there into demons. The
Queen of Chaos is said to have shaped the tanar'ri herself, the first
being the unruly Demogorgon.

At this time the gods became aware of Tharizduns treachery and decided
to intervene. They succeeded, and Tharizdun was trapped in a universe
that had been destroyed by that realm’s own version of the Abyss known
as the Voidharrow. From this time he became known as the Chained God.

In one of the most violent battles of the war between the gods and
primordials, the dragon god Io, in his arrogance, faced alone a
primordial called Erek-Hus, the King of Terror, and was killed when the
primordial cleaved him in two with his adamantine axe. Born from the two
halves of the god, Bahamut and Tiamat were born. They joined forces to
kill the primordial, but ever since have they fought against each other.

The war raged on for eons until a primordial known as Dendar the Night
Serpent devoured the sun, ushering an ice age that would kill all life.
This ended what is known as the Blue Age, and the Shadow Epoch began.

With Tharizdun gone, his chief lieutenant, the primordial Miska the
Wolf-Spider, still tried to follow his orders to assault the obyriths
and find the shard of evil. However, the obyrith known as the Queen of
Chaos slew the Prince of Demons, Obox-Ob, and offered his title to
Miska. Where Obox-ob struck, the Abyss was sundered, forming a deep
fissure into which the sea drained away in a boiling storm, the Blood
Rift, into which the shard of evil was lost.

The armies of Chaos would ride out through the multiverse against the
gods, led by Ouroboros the World Serpent. All seemed lost until the Wind
Dukes of Aaqa, a group of ancient beings from the elemental plane of
Air, defeated Miska at the battle of Pesh in the system of Oerth, in
Greyspace. Using the Rod of Law they banished the Prince of Demons, upon
which the rod broke into seven parts. This shattered the armies of
Chaos, and the Queen of Chaos retreated with her armies back into the
Abyss. There, the tanar'ri would also soon revolt and overthrow the
obyrith leaders.

The shard of evil is said to be still burrowing deeper into the Abyss to
this day.

In the final era of the Shadow Epoch, the primordial Ubtao turned
against his kin and aided the gods in imprisoning many of his former
allies. He also made a pact with the gods to guard the lair of Dendar
the Night Serpent in case he should return to destroy the world of
Abeir-Toril once more. He would also be given the sole control over the
peninsula known as Chult as reward for his actions.

In the aftermath, the sun was recreated and the oceans thawed, which
revealed a supercontinent that would eventually be called Merrouroboros.

This ended the Dawn War and began the Days of Thunder.

# The Age of Thunder (-35,000 DR)

This age began as the majority of the glaciers left by the cooling of
Abeir-Toril’s ocean finally revealed a supercontinent – Merrouroboros,
the lands which would one day be identified as Faerûn, Kara-Tur,
Maztica, and Zakhara. Life began to bloom once more. This was the time
of the five fabled creator races, or the Iqua-Tel’Quessir in the elven
tongue. These creator races were the sarrukh, the batrachi, the aearee,
the fey and humans. Elves and dwarves are not counted here as they, as
well as some human ethnic groups, were immigrants to Abeir-Toril from
other worlds. The titans of the Jotunbrud Tribes were also on the
supercontinent at this time, likely inhabiting it before any of the
creator races, but they are not regarded as one of them. Some sources
even refer to only three creator races – an amphibian, an avian and a
reptilian.

Although five creator races existed, only four forged empires in the
earliest days of recorded history. Humans were, at this point, primitive
beings. The sarrukh, batrachi, and aeree each dominated the lands in
turn, but not the fey. They ruled the plane of Faerie, or the Feywild,
an otherworldly realm said to be an echo of Realmspace, a place of
unusually potent magic. Their empire was established around -34,000 DR.
The fey encompasses many creatures, including korreds, sprites, and
pixies.

The orcs are also believed to have come to Abeir-Toril during this time
period. The creator races, possibly the sarrukh, built a portal to the
home plane of the orcs. Through this portal came the ancestors of the
mountain orcs. It is believed that they sought to enslave them, but the
slave orcs proved difficult to tame.

The sarrukh established themselves to be the dominant species, a race of
reptilian humanoids. They established the first significant
civilizations of Toril, their empires rising and falling between -35,000
DR and -33,500 DR. They enslaved or sacrificed other creatures in the
name of their god, the World Serpent. The sarrukh left a lasting legacy:
the racial diversity of the scaled races. They molded reptilian animals
into sentient beings such as the yuan-ti, nagas, pterafolk, lizardfolk,
troglodytes, and many other Scaled Ones.

They are believed to have first appeared in the area known as Okoth,
south of Mulhorand, and then spread rapidly throughout the land which
would be known as Faerûn. The Mhairshaulk Empire arose around −34,800 DR
on the Chultan peninsula, and the Isstosseffifil Empire followed in
−34,500 DR, based in what is now the Great Desert of Anauroch. Okoth,
the first of the sarrukh empires, still encompassed the sarrukhs'
homeland. Lesser realms, which included the city of Ss'thar'tiss'ssun
(located in what is now the Forest of Wyrms) and the city of Ilimar
(which is now split between the Great Swamp of Rethild and the Gulthmere
Forest), sprang up outside of the two great empires of Mhairshaulk and
Isstosseffifil.

The sarrukh had soon conquered so many races that they had become the
minority in their own empire, eventually causing them to crumble. This
left a vacuum in which the sarrukhs’ created races rose to prominence
and established power centers of their own – many of which are still
active to this day. The first of their empires to fall was Okoth,
collapsing circa −34,100 DR after a century of civil strife that caused
many sarrukh to emigrate to different planes of existence.
Isstosseffifil followed suit around −33,800 DR during a war with the
mysterious magical creatures known as phaerimms. During this war, the
leaders of Isstosseffifil rerouted the Narrow Sea, causing it to flood
the Underdark (where the phaerimms resided) but also precipitating major
climatological changes that doomed their own realm. Mhairshaulk was the
last of the sarrukh empires to fall, its inhabitants sliding into deep
hibernations circa −33,500 DR. The yuan-ti would gain control of the
realm when the Sarrukh Empire fell.

However, the sarrukh have still managed to remain relevant. Despite
their small numbers, they still command the loyalty and respect of the
races that they had created to this very day. The sarrukh of
Isstosseffifil retreated into lichdom in the depths of Oreme where they
still sleep to this day. The sarrukh of Mhairshaulk were faced with
starvation, so they began a cycle in which thousand-year hibernations
alternated with brief periods of activity, during which food gathering
and procreation could take place. The mighty clans of Okoth, however,
wandered the planes of existence for millennia, but never did they find
a plane where they wished to remain for more than a generation.

It was the sarrukh who began gathering all magical knowledge from their
vast empire’s borders into one location, in order to consolidate their
arcane power. They created the Nether Scrolls, scriptures that described
fundamental magical theory. This effort spawned its own secret society,
the Ba’etith, and lasted thousands of years. Their creation would
include magic from the batrachi and aearee as well.

The batrachi amphibioids grew to the height of power once the sarrukh
were gone, circa -33,500 DR, out-competing the rising power of the
yuan-ti, thus ensuring they would never achieve the heights of their
creators. This was achieved under the leadership of Zhoukoudien, the
High One. However, their golden age would end as they began to wage war
against the Jotunbrud Tribes. Around -31,500 DR, The High One was killed
in battle by Omo, a titan thane. Later, around -31,000 DR, the batrachi
were losing the war against the titans. In an attempt to sway the
battle, the batrachi enacted a great summoning ritual that unleashed
several once-imprisoned primordials. The gods were swift to oppose the
primordials, but this clash would rain destruction on Abeir-Toril. The
battles destroyed the batrachi civilization, but many batrachi managed
to flee Abeir-Toril, including Bazim-Gorag, the Firebringer. Although
the batrachi were gone, their descendants can still be found in the
Realms. These amphibious, piscine, and shapeshifting races include
bullywugs, doppelgangers, kuo-toa, and locathah.

The primordial Asgorath, the World Shaper, hurled an ice moon or comet
at Abeir-Toril to destroy what she could not have. This event is today
known as the Tearfall. Disastrous earthquakes, fires, and windstorms
swept across all of Abeir-Toril, destroying land and rearranging the
seas. This is thought to be how the Sea of Fallen Stars was formed, and
the creation of dragons.

To stop the destruction before the whole world was completely destroyed
Lord Ao intervened and sundered Abeir-Toril into two twin worlds, Abeir
and Toril. The primordials and their home, the elemental chaos, went
with Abeir, and the gods and their home, the Astral Sea, went with
Toril. As a way to maintain the new worlds of Abeir and Toril apart, and
to ensure a balance between the forces of Law and Chaos, as well as
between the gods and the primordials, the Tablets of Fate were created
by Ao. On these two tablets he inscribed the names and purposes of every
god and primordial in the universe.

Around the same time as the event Tearfall, around 31,000 DR, the aearee
rose to prominence on a massive island off the coast of Merrouroboros,
pre-Sundering. They would soon establish empires across the land, and
the creation of winged wyrms, or wyverns, would lead to a more rapid
expansion. The aearee were also the creators of the aarakocra, kenku,
and other birdlike humanoids.  
However, around -30,000 DR, dragons all over gathered behind the
dragon-general of Tiamat, Nagamat, in the first Flight of Dragons to
assault the aearee in the sky, on land, and underground. Nagamat would
claim their realm as his own. This resulted in the downfall of the
aearee, and ushered in a new era of constant war.

# The Dawn Age (-30,000 DR)

This period begins with the disappearance of the once powerful empires
of the creator races, their occupation by giants and dragons far more
powerful than those of present day. This was the Time of Dragons and the
Time of Giants.

The great giant god Annam the All-Father married the demigoddess Othea,
and they had eight terrestrial children. Ostoria was founded by Annam in
honor of his sons coming of age. He split the land up so that each of
his sons could acquire part of it; Lanaxis, Vilmos, Nicias, Masud,
Ottar, Obadai, Ruk, and his two-headed son, Arno and Julian, who all
would form one of the main giant species. The capital of Ostoria became
a citadel built by Lanaxis called Voninheim.

The rise of the new apex predator, the dragons, is thought to be related
to the Tearfall. Some believe that Asgorath did not cast meteors down at
Abeir-Toril, but rather dragon eggs. Others believe that this event
precipitated a dramatic climatic change, which in turn sparked the rapid
evolution of proto-dragons into the varied forms of dragonkind known
today.

A series of civil wars was fought among dragonkind during the Time of
Dragons over philosophical differences between the different religious
dogmas of the draconic pantheon. They were devout followers of their
gods, and such devotion sparked intense wars among them, known as the
Draco Holy Wars. Around -29,500 DR, Xymor (Bahamut) attacked and slew
Nagamat, inciting the Dragonfall War, a conflict that persists to this
day.

A succession of dragon empires would dominate central Merrouroboros over
the next four thousand years. The dragons would enslave the primitive
humans and other demihumans. It is said that the chromatic were
especially fierce against the “lesser” races, with the metallic being
more benevolent masters, but a few metallics believe this was not the
case.

Around -28,000 DR Ostoria was at its peak of power, dubbed the Colossal
Kingdom. The giants recognized that the dragons were getting more
powerful, threatening their kingdom. However, they were not alone. The
fey also recognized the power of dragons and sought to undermine their
rule. Planar gates were opened around -27,000 DR, allowing a group of
closely related races named the Tel-Quessir to immigrate to Toril. These
races are more commonly known as elves though this term is now
acknowledged to be technically inaccurate.

Around -26,000 DR the dragon god Garyx sent an avatar to lead a flight
of red dragons to attack the giant nation, which soon involved all races
of dragonkind. This conflict would last for a thousand years. Some say
it ended because of the Draco Holy Wars. Others tell of a game of
wah-ree between Annam and Garyx that ended in stalemate. It is also said
that it ended as a direct result of a curse that struck Tiamat, dooming
her to become a prisoner in Avernus, on the Nine Hells. Upon its
conclusion, Ostoria had shrunk to only a shadow of its former self.

During this war, Othea had an affair with Vaprak, resulting in the ogre
race. She would also have another affair, this time with Ulutiu,
resulting in four sons that would give rise to the firbolg, fomorian,
verbeeg and voadkyn.

The fey also recognized the power of dragons and sought to undermine
their rule. Planar gates were opened around -27,000 DR, allowing a group
of closely related races named the Tel-Quessir – “the People” – to
immigrate to Toril. The first to step through is said to be the lythari,
avariel, and a group of wild (or green) elves. The wild elves worshipped
the Faerie gods and were content to remain in small scattered tribes,
but one group known as the Ilythiiri negotiated with the dragons and
began to carve out a small kingdom. These would be known as the dark
elves, or later, the drow. The great Ilythiiri capital at Atorrnash
would remain a shining beacon of elf culture for millennia.  
Eventually other sub-races of elves would come to Merrouroboros. Fleeing
the destruction of the island kingdom of Tintageer on their home world
of Faerie, a small circle of gold elves led by a young prince Durothil
cast a divination to find their new home – on the world of Toril – and
then created a portal leading there. The refugees named their new home
Faerûn, the One Land. Integrating into the native wild elf communities,
the descendants of the gold elves of Tintageer would become known as sun
elves, while the descendants of the sole silver elf refugee, Sharlario
Moonflower, would become known as moon elves.  
The aquatic elves were the last of the elven races to reach the realm.

By -24,500 DR both sun and moon elf communities build great cities that
rivaled the magnificence of ancient Atorrnash. The sun elf city of
Occidian is heralded as the center of elven music and dance, while the
moon elf city of Sharlarion is unrivaled as the crossroads of trade and
commerce.

At this time came also the first of the dragonspawn, kobolds and urds.
The first of the dragonspawn – Kurtulmak, the Horned Sorcerer – ruled in
the city of Darastrixhurthi, a vassal state of the kingdom
Darastriverthicha ruled by Caesinsjach, the mightiest of green dragons.

A hundred years later, at -24,400 DR, Lolth’s attention is drawn to
Toril for the first time as the moon elf Kethryllia battles her minions
in the Abyss before returning home to Faerûn.

The elf city of Occidian is also sacked by a horde of orcs led by the
abyssal fiend Heaskarr, which then attacks Sharlarion. The horde and
Haeshkarr are defeated by the elves at great cost.

Around 25,000 DR, a circle of elven High Mages rebelling against dragon
rule created something called the Dracorage mythal. This effect tied a
widespread mythal (a powerful magical effect) to the King-Killer Star, a
reddish cometary body periodically visible from Toril. Its appearance
caused the dragons to go mad with rage, destroying and killing without
reason. This event even turned them against each other and even against
their offspring. The dragons made a desperate attempt to destroy the
Dracorage mythal but brave avarial defenders sacrificed their lives to
protect it, almost wiping out the whole race. The dragons were unable to
stop the magic fueling the Rage and, therefore, around -24,000 DR the
Time of Dragons ended with the devastation of the dragons’
civilizations. This enabled the elves to raise their great empires,
beginning the age known as the First Flowering.

# The First Flowering (-24,000 DR)

From the ruins of the Days of Thunder arose the first nations of the
Proud People – the elves and dwarves – in the region.

There’s evidence that halflings, as a race, appeared on Toril around
this time, but very little is known about their ancestry.

The gnomes are also said to have been created around this time. Gnomish
myths held that the gods of the gnome pantheon originated as gems deep
within the bowels of the earth that were then exposed to open air.
Likewise, these myths held that the gnomes were created when Garl
Glittergold discovered similar gems and breathed life into them, which
he followed up with a joke, inspiring the race to craftiness and
mischief. This story also related that gnomes born of diamonds became
the rock gnomes, while those forged of emeralds became forest gnomes and
those made of rubies were the ancestors of the deep gnomes.

The elves thrived for thousands of years, raising many great kingdoms
and cities across the land. Their success in defending against dragons,
giants and the occasional orc attack also let other races to begin the
slow climb to civilization. At the start of this period, the elves had
split into five major realms: Aryvandaar, Illefarn, Keltormir, Miyeritar
and Shantel Othreier, as well as several smaller ones such as Eiellûr,
Ilythiir, Orishaar, Syòrpiir and Thearnytaar.

Around -24,000 DR the Yuan-ti-ruled Mhairshaulk had all but collapsed,
thanks to repeated assaults on its cities by the great wyrms of the
south. About the same time an army of winged serpents known as couatls
are called into service by the god Ubtao and arrive in the jungles of
Chult from an unknown continent to the west. The yuan-ti and couatls
battle each other for control of the Chultan Peninsula for centuries,
ending in a stalemate with the Hazur Mountains as the dividing line
between the two territories.

-23,900 DR, the sun elves establish the first settlements of Aryvandaar
in what later would be known as the High Forest.

-23,600 DR, the first moon elf settlements of Ardeep are established,
what would later be known as Greenfields.

-23,100 DR, the first gold and moon elf settlements of Syòrpiir are
established, what would later be known as Ankhwood and Chondalwood.

-22,900 DR, the wild elves join their moon elf cousins in Ardeep.

The elf settlement of Illefarn is also founded at this time, in what
would later be known as Ardeep, Kryptgarden Forests and parts of
Dessarin Valley.

-22,500 DR, the moon elf settlements of Orishaar are established in what
would be known as Duskwood and the Shaar.

-21,400 DR, the wild elf settlements of Thearnytaar are established in
what would be known as Thornwood.

-21,000 DR, the wild elf settlements of Eiellûr in what would be known
as Winterwood.

There is also evidence that around -20,000 DR, meerfolk, locathah, and
sahuagin exist in Serôs and have battled each other since that time.

During this age, for the next several millennia, the elves would live in
relative peace. Although, around -20,000 DR, the Orishaar and the
southern dark elf nation of Ilythiir began skirmishes that would
continue on and off for the next seven millennia.

-18,800 DR, establishment of the first elf settlements of Miyeritar,
present-day High Moor and Misty Forest, by wild and dark elves due to
political differences with the sun elves of Aryvandaar.

There is evidence that the Citadel of the Raven, situated within the
Dragonspine Mountains, was constructed in this period, around -18,000
DR. Some scholars purport that the citadel is irrefutable evidence that
a grand human nation existed on Faerûn long before recorded history.
It’s possible that these were the ancestors of the barbarians of The
Ride.

-17,800 DR, the great elf settlements of Keltormir are established by
moon and wild elves in what would be known as Forest of Tethyr that
spans all of Tethyr, Amn, Erlkazar, and Calimshan. They sought peace and
simple lives away from the strife of the other elf realms.

The evil deity Lolth, Queen of the Demonweb Pits, had become interested
in the world of Toril. She had begun poisoning the relationship between
the Ilythiir and other elven nations by causing wars and strife. With
every passing year the tensions between them grew, which led to the
First Sundering. This was an event that happened around -17,600 DR,
where elven High Mages cast a powerful ritual that created the Isle of
Evermeet in the Trackless Sea, a promised land for all the children of
Corellon Larethian, thought to be a piece of Arvandor itself. This would
be a safe haven that would exclude the dark elves. They only succeeded
with the help of the Seldarine. The goddess Angharradh blessed the new
land, making the island flourish with life. Corellon Larethian warded it
against Lolth, Malar, and the other powers of the anti-Seldarine and
entrusted the Fair Folk with a strange seed that would sprout into the
Tree of Souls.

But this creation came with a price. They unleashed the magic of the
Weave and funneled it through their bodies and fueled it with their own
life forces, ripping their very souls from their bodies. This sent a
ripple back and forth in time, which linked up to the Tearfall and a
coming sundering event in the future. Faerûn, the One Land, is sundered
apart by the unbridled force of the Sundering. The biggest continent was
given the name Faerûn. The coast of Faerûn was destroyed by tremendous
earthquakes and floods. Hundreds of elven settlements were destroyed,
others changed forever. Much of the Ilythiir empire perished, killing
many worshipers of Vhaerun and with that, Lolth became the dominant
goddess for the survivors.

Around -17,500 DR, three elven realms, Thearnytaar, Eiellûr, and
Syòrpirr made steps to unify themselves into a single nation but was
thwarted by the Ilythiiri spies and assassins. By -17,100 DR, the
relationship between the three nations deteriorated so far that they
started the War of Three Leaves among themselves. This war ended around
16,800 DR, when they came behind Ilythiir’s involvement and started
skirmishes against that nation alongside continuing to skirmish each
other.

-17,000 DR, the elves of Eillûr, Syorpiir, and Thearnytar emigrate to
the undersea realms of the Inner Sea for the next seven millennia.

The great mountain range known as the Yehimal was the site of the very
first dwarf settlements on Toril, founded around -16,000 DR. These
creatures are said to have come from the heart of the planet itself,
that Moradin made them by hammer and anvil in his Soulforge and placed
them deep underground. According to the dwarves themselves, they were
made from iron and mithril.  
They later made a great exodus out of the Yehimal, migrating into the
continents of Faerûn, Kara-Tur, and Zakhara before spreading across the
face of the entire planet, except for those who migrated northwards and
came to rest in the mountains of Novularond. These would be known as the
arctic dwarves.

By -15,300 DR, the elf Vyshaan clan rose to power in Aryvandaar under
Coronal Ivósaar Vyshan.

By -15,000 DR, they dwarves had already founded their first great
kingdom, Bhaerynden, deep beneath the Shaar.

-14,700 DR, the Vyshaan of the sun elf kingdom of Aryvandaar discovered
an alleged link between their family and the Olrythii family of dark
elves of Miyeritar and attemps to diplomatically and peacefully annex
Miyeritar into their realm and under their control.

There is evidence that tribal barbarian clans of humans roam Keltormir
around -14,000 DR.

By -13,900 DR, Miyeritar had become the center of elven Art and High
Magic in Faerûn.

The elves of Aryvandaar discovered the Hall of Mists beneath the High
Forest, an ancient stronghold of the Ba’etith, around -12,500 DR and
summoned an arakhor to guard the site. Over the millennia, this creature
became known as Grandfather Tree.

# The Crown Wars (-12,000 DR)

The Crown Wars were a series of elven wars spanning 3,000 years that led
to the end to the elves’ golden age.

The first Crown War war broke out in -12,000 DR when the Vyshaan’s
attempt at annexing Miyeritar failed after years of skirmishing and
trade interference (since about -13,200 DR). By -11,800 DR, Aryvandaar
fully occupied Miyeritar, but did not come under full control for
another 500 years.

Ostensibly in support of their Miyeritar allies, the dark elf country of
Ilythiir attacked the moon elf kingdom of Orishaar during the first
Crown War, and then escalated the conflict to encompass Thearnytaar,
Eillur, and Syorpiir, utterly destroying them. The brutality of these
attacks led to the creation of the epithet dhaerow, meaning "traitor,"
to describe the dark elves of Ilythiir. The Ilythiiri conflicts, or the
Second Crown War, which began in approximately -11,700 DR, spanned over
1,200 years, and during the course of the savage war, the demon goddess
Lolth took the opportunity to seduce the ruling families and powers in
the kingdom further towards evil

The dwarf Taark Shanat and his eight sons would, around -11,000 DR, lead
a westward migration from the caverns of Bhaerynden. At -10,800 DR,
Taark Shanat’s engages the inhabitants of Rringlor Noroth, initiating
the Cloaker Wars. This included four blue dragons occupying the Rift of
Dhalnadar who were all slain by Taark, bringing a victory for the
dwarves. Alatorin and its famous Brightaxe Hall were established on this
site. The skulls of the four dragons were brought together with a throne
that emerged from the floor of the cavern (which was by then Brightaxe
Hall), by a deity who was probably Dumathoin, and this created the
Wyrmskull Throne.

The descendents of the Shanatar would eventually become the shield
dwarves, and according to them this was the start of the First Great Age
of Shanatar.

The third Crown War happened around -10,900 DR when Aryvandaar was aided
by a fallen solar named Malkizid in invading the sun and moon elf
kingdom of Shantel Othreier. This war waged for nearly 300 years until
Shantel Othreier surrendered after the death of their coronal.

One sun elf clan and two moon elf clans of Aryvandaar, along with sun
and moon elf clans of other elf realms, flee the Vyshaan and establish
the realm of Ilodhar along the western shores of a mountain-nestled
lake, in what we know today as Lake Miir.

In -10,500 DR, owing to destructive magics of Vyshaantar, the Dark
Disaster occurred, and a magical storm turned Miyeritar into the
wasteland now known as the High Moor. Enraged at the destruction of
their dark-elf brothers' land, Ilythiiri savagely attacked the
Vyshaantar Empire. The Ilythiiri began to openly worship evil gods,
namely Lolth, Ghaunadaur, Kiaransalee and Vhaeraun, and commit such acts
of atrocities that all the remaining elven kingdoms wished to expel the
Ilythiiri dark elves from Corellon Larethian's grace.

By -10,000 DR their plea for divine salvation was heard. Corellon’s
magic changed these traitors, or dhaerow, forming the drow. They were
driven into the Underdark thus ending the Ilythiir. This event would be
known as the Descent of the Drow. The elves were summoned by the
Seldarine to form the Corellon Larethian-mandated Elven Court in the
forest Cormanthor one month later to settle differences and restore
peace among the elves.

But that was not the end of the Crown Wars. In 9,200 DR the fragile
peace was once again broken when the Elven Court decreed that the sun
elf clan of Vyshaan was responsible for the thousands of years of war,
which led them to wage war on everyone. Within 200 years, their ancient
kingdom of Aryvandaar in the High Forest was no more, marking an end to
the Crown Wars. Much of the High Forest is left unoccupied for an age to
come to regain its peace. Many elves would migrate back to the Elven
Court in the eastern forests, while others migrate into the Inner Sea.

Unlike the majority of the dispossessed survivors of the Crown Wars, who
abandoned their homelands and went on to found new kingdoms elsewhere,
some decided to stay to their ancestral holdings and swore to never wage
war on their kin again. While not following the same path as the wild
elves, they formed tightly knit, networked communities, leaving behind
high magic and becoming closer to nature. It was from the interbreeding
between wild elves, moon elves, and sun elves that these people, the
wood elves, emerged.  
The Yuirwood was settled by small numbers of wild elves in the aftermath
of the wars, and a large force of Llewyrr elves escaped the oppressive
mainland and resettled in isolation and safety among the mountains of
the Moonshae Islands.

# The Founding Time (-9,000 DR)

The dwarves and elves were still the dominating force on Faerûn after
the end of the Crown Wars. During this time, the humanoid races began
their expansionist efforts. Elves, dwarves, and the first human tribes
would found several realms such as Evereska, High Shanatar, and Imaskar.

Several major conflicts occurred during this time, including the Spider
Wars and the Era of Skyfire.

The Telantiwar drow conquer the dwarven kingdom of Bhaerynden in -9,000
DR, sending dwarven refugees to surrounding lands. One sizeable group
migrates to the Chultan Peninsula, and then fractures into small tribes
that would become the wild dwarves. Dwarves would later return to
Bharynden after it caved in, creating the great rift, in -7,600 DR. They
founded the Deep Realm, and over the millennia they would become known
as the gold dwarves.

In -8,100 DR, the illithids of Oryndoll (founded during the Crown Wars
in -11,000 DR by refugees from the Realmspace planet of Glyth) assaulted
the eastern dwarven subkingdoms of Shanatar, beginning the Mindstalker
Wars that would last 20 years. The caverns of Barakuir were cut off
early in the war, and Clan Duergar was captured and enslaved by the
illithids, beginning their transformation into duergar back in Oryndoll
in the Lowerdark. This would last for four millennia before a slave
revolt sees them escape from mind flayer domination. The freed duergar
settled beneath the Orsraun Mountains, in the northern Underdark, and in
distant caverns under the Great Glacier.

The first contact with halflings also took place during this era, around
-6,000 DR, when humans explored the Lluirwood Forest and discovered
three different tribes of halflings dwelling there; the Strongheart, the
Lightfoot, and Ghostwise halfling clans.

# The Age of Humanity (-3,000 DR)

This period began with the decline of the elven and dwarven empires and
the flourishing and expansion of the human empires. With the limited
years given to them, humans seek to become great kings or great wizards,
building grand kingdoms and empires. They have spread out across all of
Toril, with the environments shaping their different cultural
linguistic, physical and religious traits.

Humans have a fragmented history. Where the elves and dwarves seem to
have come from a major tribe or migration to Toril, humans were largely
isolated from one another. Where elves had unifying cultural heritage,
humans had to evolve their own culture separate from other humans.

The earliest of humans were in the shadows of more powerful races, and
this made human tribes ignorant of each other.

Instead of presenting a timeline of events during this period, focus
will be on presenting the history of the many ethnic groups of humans
that got to flourish and expand, some extending several millennia back.

## The Netherese

Of all the human empires, that of Netheril represented the genesis of
this epoch. In -2,954 DR, at the end of the Mythallar Age of Netheril
(-3,315 DR to -2,759 DR), Ioulam created the first floating enclave,
Xinlenal, by means of the spell Proctiv’s move mountain. This would lead
many other powerful mages of Netheril to creating flying enclaves of
their own, in effect splitting the nation into two, High and Low
Netheril.

The Silver Age of Netheril, which took place between -2,758 DR to -2,208
DR, began with the founding of the empire's new ruling council, the High
Mages of Netheril. During this era, the Netherese discovered the
deposits of valuable ore in passageways beneath the Greypeak Mountains,
established the mines of Dekanter and founded small colonies and
outposts in the North. In time, the Netherese archwizards began to feel
cramped in their floating cities, leading to ideas of expansion in the
Savage Frontier. The idea to expand westward was fueled by the
Terraseer, a mysterious oracle who discovered the Old Owl Well in -2,368
DR, and established the trademeet settlement of Quesseer, which served
the traders from Netheril, Illuskan seafarers, the elves of Illefarn and
dwarves from Haunghdannar.

The next millennium, the Golden Age between -2,207 DR to -1,206 DR, was
a period of great advancements in magical understanding, prodigious
expansion and vast change for the Empire of Netheril, the beginning of
which was marked by the birth of Jeriah Chronos, the founder of the
chronomancy school of magic, in -2,207 DR. During this time, Netheril
began lifting one enclave into the sky per year, including Thultanthar.
Soon there were dozens of enclaves riding the air currents or orbiting
patterns around the loosely defined borders of Netheril. They also
explored the depths of the Sea of Fallen Stars and established three
undersea, crystal-domed colonies that came to be known as Deep Netheril.
In the following century the subaqueous Netherese enslaved the Serôsian
aquatic elves, the colonies were destroyed by the high mages of
Aryselmalyr in a catastrophic, undersea explosion so large that it
created the Saerloon and Selgaunt Bays.

A number of profound arcane advancements were made during the 500 years
following the Golden Age, what is called the Age of Discover (-1,205 DR
to -697 DR). The first of which was the discovery of chardalyn within
mines beneath the Plain of Standing Stones beneath Low Netheril in
-1,205 DR. Uncovering these magic-absorbing minerals led to great
experiments in the field of gem magic. The arcanists began to research
into the travel to other planets in realmspace, by means of flying ships
known as spelljammers. While venturing outside Toril's crystal sphere
the Netherese first encountered illithids, who attacked the space-faring
wizards on sight. This aberrant hostility ceased spelljamming endeavors
on Toril for another thousand years.

The last age of Netheril, the Shadowed Age, began with the birth of the
mage Karsus in -696 DR, whose actions brought the empire crashing down
to Toril. He was a savant among the prodigious arcanists of Netheril,
attaining a mastery of spellcraft nearly instantly. During the next 300
years he created the enclave of Eileanar, discovered heavy magic and
killed the rogue arcanist Wulgreth, transforming him into a lich.

During this age, a number of significant of discoveries occurred that
adversely affected the Empire of Netheril and greater region of north
Faerûn for centuries. In -681 DR, arcanists who came to be known as the
horribly twisted creatures, Night Parade, traveled to the Demiplane of
Nightmares which was scantly protected by the aberrations of the Far
Realm. In -553 DR the arcanists of Netheril discovered the plane of
Shadow, which became the destination to where Telamont Tanthul would
shift his enclave of Thultanthar in -339 DR, when it came to be known as
the "Shade Enclave".

While Netheril's flying cities flourished in the sky, magical residue
seeped into the earth below and became an affliction for a race of
subterranean dwelling creatures called the phaerimm. Eventually, the
phaerimm grew tired of their torment and began to retaliate in a war
with Netheril. In -461 DR they began draining both life and magic from
both Toril and the floating enclaves, creating barren wastelands where
there once were lush fields and areas of wild magic. Their actions would
create the desolate Aunaroch desert. The chaotic effects of magics
caused the arcanists of High Netheril to flee the empire for safer
lands. The enclaves of Lhaoda and Tith Tilendrothael were destroyed in
-427 DR and many of the arcanists of Low Netheril fled for the
recently-established magocracy of Illusk, the Tower of the Star in the
ruins of Andalbruin, and a settlement in the Northdark founded by
Ioulaum. The absence of the arcanists caused civil unrest in Low
Netheril, and the commoners fled their home.  
In -345 DR, Arthindol the Terraseer appeared in the enclave of Eileanar
with a warning that goddess Mystryl would challenge Netheril in a manner
never before seen.

In -371 DR, although he has already survived for centuries, Ioulaum
embraces lichdom and establishes a heavily fortified lair in the
Northdark.

The fall of ancient Netheril began in -339 DR, with an event that came
to be known as Karsus’ Folly, an attempt by the brilliant arcanist
Karsus to steal the power of the goddess of magic Mystryl and ascend to
godhood. He cast an incredibly complicated spell of his own creation
called Karsus’ avatar, which weakened Mystryl and finally tore apart the
Weave that had been weakened by the war between the phaerimm and
Netheril. Magical effects doubled in power briefly, then became wild and
chaotic. This forced Mystryl to sacrifice herself to keep it intact,
severing Karsus’ connection to Mystryl, killing him, and all arcane
magic temporarily ceased to function. This nullified the mythallars of
Netheril and caused nearly all the enclaves to come crashing down to the
surface of Toril. Their ruins were littered across northern Faerûn, and
their residual magic and power would influence the Realms for centuries.

Almost immediately after Mystryl died, she was reincarnated as Mystra,
the goddess of magic who retained her position until the Time of
Troubles. She would also take a much more lawful view of magic and laid
down some rules, including a decree that all High Magic would fail
utterly.  
Despite the enormity of destruction caused by Karsus's Folly, she was
able to save three of the falling Netherese enclaves, Anauria, Asram,
and Hlondath.  
The lands directly south of Netheril became the home of the Anaurians,
who became renowned for creating fine swords and carrying on the magical
legacy of Netheril. The lack of high-level magics and mythallars
severely hampered their efforts, however, and the kingdom was finally
destroyed in a bloody and costly battle against an orc horde in 450
DR.  
No sooner had Asram recovered from the Fall than it was suddenly struck
by a horrendous plague sent by Talona that claimed all the Asramans in
-33 DR. In the spring months that led up to what many called a repeat of
the Dark Disaster that ravaged the elves of Miyeritar, cattle were found
dead in the fields and crops withered and died, sometimes overnight.
During the first week of Eleasias of that year, the plague struck the
entire nation, leaving a scant few survivors.  
The longest-lived of the survivor-states, the people of Hlondath
immediately began blaming others for the fall of Netheril‚ discounting
the news that Karsus himself had caused the destruction. Their favorite
target for such blame was the elves of Cormanthyr, whom they saw as
"accomplices of the phaerimm". They established good relations with the
dwarves of Tethyamar, but otherwise concentrated on logging the nearby
forest and herding cattle across the plains. In 199 DR, the Hlondathans
finally incited the Cormanthyr elves into a war, a conflict that came to
be known as the Crown Against Scepter Wars. The forces of Hlondath were
repeatedly crushed in battle by Myth Drannor and the nation was greatly
weakened. As the Anauroch desert slowly spread across the fertile lands
of the Realm, the Netherese survivors were scattered across Faerûn.

Some of arcanists and wizards were able to lead some of their people to
safety. Raumark led a group of refugees south by traveling in their
airships to the Shining South and would go on to found the nation of
Halruaa. The dwarves of Ascore guided Netherese survivors through the
subterranean passageway of the Lowroad to the realm of Delzoun.

When the Tanthul saw the catastrophe that occurred in their absence,
assuming the destruction was caused by the Phaerimm, he decided to
remain in the Shadow Plane in order to maintain what could be the last
of their magically-gifted people. He vowed to one day return to Toril
and re-establish the Empire of Magic.

## The Calishite

Calishites are native to Amn, Calimshan, the Shaar and surrounding
areas, but originally they were actually brought to Faerûn by their
genie lords in -7,800 DR from the Zakharan Peninsula. They are known
collectively as the Djen. The main djinn, Calim, who founded the great
city of Calimport, claimed that the enslavement of humans were in
revenge for their servitude, their magical bondage to wizards. For a
thousand years Calim drove his servant genies and mortal slaves to build
the early Calimshan civilizations. They drove out dragons and giants and
angered the elves by taking their forests and burning them down,
claiming all lands south-west of the Marching Mountains as the Calim
Empire. Different genies went out and took control over other areas of
present day Calimshan, like the marids of Ajhuutal in -7,130 DR and the
efreeti of Memnonnar in -6,800 DR under Memnon. This angered Calim who
wanted to unite control under his rule. So a great war occurred between
these genie generals for several centuries. Not many battles were
fought, but the destruction from their clashes would prove catastrophic.
Calim was unable to destroy the rebel city of Ajhuutal and witnessing
the growing envy of his own people at the freedom Ajhuu's rebels enjoy,
Calim rashly sacrificed his dao allies and earth magic artifacts to
destroy Ajhutaal with a greatly enhanced earthquake spell. The spell's
effect, later referred to as the Shattering, caused the city to crumble
and fall into the sea. Unfortunately, it also destroys all the land in a
thirty-mile radius around the epicenter, creating the Spider Swamp. The
war between Calim and Memnon broke out in -6,500 DR, a war of twenty-two
battles over four centuries, known as the Era of Skyfire.  
The elves devised a plan to imprison the genies. Elf High Mages began
casting a powerful spell collectively in -6,100 DR. It pulled in more
than half of the major genies from around the lands including the two
genie generals Calim and Memnon. Within hours the genies gathered were
crushed together into a massive crystalline red gem. Calim and Memnon
were gathered there last of all, but not before splitting their minds
and bodies. They scattered Calim’s consciousness into the four winds and
Memnon’s into the soil. The spell destroyed the area, transforming it
into a hostile desert, the present-day Calim Desert. This left behind a
number of human slaves and servants.

By -6,048 DR, assisted by Shanatar's dwarves, Calishite humans
successfully rebelled against the remaining genies of the broken Calim
Empire. The Calishites rebuilt Calimport and Keltar, and developed the
nation of Coramshan in the lands east of the Calim Desert and south of
the Marching Mountains. The alliance between the humans and dwarves
quickly deteriorated, however, because the rulers of Coramshan soon
turned to the worship of evil gods. Despotic human priests would fill
the power gap as rulers in -5,790 DR, known as bakkals. The relationship
between the Calishites and the dwarves would deteriorate even further
after the dwarves killed human tomb robbers at Mount Kellarak, in what
would be known as Ambril’s Bane. The heir to the throne of Coramshan was
among their number, triggering three thousand years of war between them.

After the rise of Jhaamdath around -5,800 DR, Coramshan began a struggle
with the burgeoning psionic empire over the Lake of Steam. This was
settled in -5,005 DR when they signed a truce limiting Coramshan's
expansion in that area. Coramshan was also renamed Calimshan around this
time when the realm joined with the nation of Mir under Ukhar IV, who
was both bakkal and murabir. Calimshan then claims the entirety of the
lands west of the Iltkazar Mountains and south of the Wurlur river. The
bakkals were highly expansionistic and pursued the goal of eradication
of the dwarves, leading to the abandonment of High Shanatar circa -2,600
DR. Seeking to build a great empire, Calimshan was only checked by the
elves of the northern forest but to the east, in -2,381 DR, beholder
spaceships crashed into the Alimir Mountains, establishing the city of
Xokir, the City of Orbs. This foe would plague Calimshan for many
millennia to come. The resurgent worship of genies would also halt
expansionism and Calimshan came to venerate the arts.

In -1,838 DR, in retribution for Calishite adventurers plundering her
hoard and slaying one of her brood, Ylveraasahlisar the Rose Dragon
destroyed Calimshan’s army, the Caleph’s Court, the Raor Bakkal, and
two-thirds of Calimport before she settled onto the bakkal’s throne and
ruled the heart of the empire. Much of Calimport Muzad (the subterranean
portion of the city) comes into being as a result of the red dragon’s
attack, as her demands for the city’s immediate reconstruction forces
builders to simply smooth out the rubble and begin again on top of the
old structures. She would be ousted by human dragonslayers led by Rafak
el Cajaan in -1,726. The noble family that slew her rose up to be the
royal house of Calimshan, after much infighting and debate. Giving the
title Pasha to their new emperor a new ruling family was now in place.

Calimport would again fall with the death of Syl-Pasha Violir Cajaan IX.
Qyraaptir the Bloodeye, a beholder-mage of frightening power, claimed
the Pasha’s Throne, ruling the ruined city of Calimport and its vassal
empire. Beholders now rule all major settlements throughout Calimshan,
Iltkazar and the Lake of Steam. In -1,402 DR, Qyraaptir the Bloodeye and
its beholder forces fall or flee before the Drakhon priests and their
allied human soldiers. Calimport is the first city freed of beholder
domination, and Calimshan is free of beholder rulers within three years,
thanks to the rule of the Drakhon pashas. The beholders retreat to their
strongholds beneath the Alimir Mountains and along the Lake of Steam.

Syl-Pasha Kamal el Drakhon commissions the building of el Qysanallojal
(Imperial Navy) in -1,150 DR, and this allows Calimshan to begin
controlling the coastal lands and waters of the Shining Sea. Originally
built to speed troop movements against the beholder armies, the
Qysanallojal swiftly expands Calimshan’s political and trade influence.
The Lake of Steam beholders would also slowly be driven underground
again by Calimshan’s navy between this time and -680 DR. The Calimshan’s
dominance of the Lake of Steam and the Shining Sea would actually come
to an end in -446 DR with the near total destruction of the Calishite
Armada in Calimport’s harbor. The resulting fires destroy over 70
percent of the city as winds carry sparks and flames to the wooden domes
of many buildings.

The Throne Wars begin in -188 DR as Syl-Pasha Malik yn Asraf el Majizar
is assassinated and many factions war among themselves for the caleph’s
throne as Calimport is set ablaze. By year’s end, fifteen people rise to
the throne with all but one dying. A year later, after the death of
twenty-seven other rulers, the Throne Wars of Calimshan end with the
ascension of Tasyn el Tarshaj yi Manshaka to syl-pasha. He and his
family simultaneously conquer the cities of Manshaka, Memnon, Calimport,
and Almraiven. A start is made on the rebuilding of Calimport and the
reconquering of the rest of the realm. Calimshan, in its attempts to
reconquer its old territories around the Lake of Steam and the Shaar in
-182 DR, discovers that the old threat of the beholders has risen again.
Beholders and their cultists control the majority of territory east of
Ankhapur and are now pushing their forces west (or immediately up and
out of the Alimir Mountains) in retaliation against the Calishite
invasions. Calimshan allies with Tethyr and Iltkazar to fight the risen
beholder powers of the Arnaden in the Eye Tyrant Wars. Almraiven falls
to beholders within the first three months of the year, and Suldolphor
follows by Greengrass. Though a longer struggle, the beholders control
the Spider Swamp and the southern Forest of Mir by the end of Kythorn.
This prevents much transfer of troops from western Calimshan except
directly into beholder-controlled strongholds. In the first five days of
Uktar in -167 DR, King Silvam of Tethyr and Qayadin Revaod el Simaal
lead the Fourth Army to victory over nine beholders and three times
their army’s own forces. — The beholders occupy Volothamp and Schamedar
by year’s end, though their entrenchment within eastern Calimshan
overextends their reach, and the beholders lose control of Ankhapur, one
of their largest surface strongholds. The Eye Tyrant Wars end in -166
DR, though alliances remain among the human powers to pursue renegade
beholders for the next few years among all their lands. The alliances of
Calimshan, Tethyr, and Iltkazar would dissolve a few years later.

In -150 DR, Syl-Pasha Kamus yn Tasyn el Tarshaj of Calimport grants
Tethyr the region known as Ankaram, the lands west of the Forest of Mir
and north of the River Memnon. Although many in Tethyr believe this to
be a reward for their aid in the Eye Tyrant Wars, it is a political move
to weaken Calishite nobles amassing power against el Tarshaj.

By 27 DR a new imperium rose to power in Calimshan, the Shoon Imperium.
This was a period where Calimshan greatly enhanced its power and
influence for over 400 years until Tethyr again asserted its
independence in 450 DR, concurrently freeing a new nation in Amn. Within
100 years of the Imperium’s fall, the government of Calimshan fell to
its slaves. Calimport was burned to the ground and Manshaka was made the
state capital while the eastern cities that survived the Imperium's fall
had to fend off humans who had come to worship beholders. The
slave-warriors known as mameluks ruled for centuries, but that would end
in 1,088 DR with the Rage of Dragons.

The wealthy began buying up land, restoring slavery and forging
short-lived alliances purely for personal gain. This led to decades of
trade wars which destabilized the entire nation with what could be
dozens of individuals laying claim to one city. One man, Saban el
Djenispool tried to reunite the nation under him as Syl-Pasha (chief of
pashas) and while he ultimately failed, he did manage to gain the
support of each of the city-states pashas that created a status quo that
would last for the next two centuries.

Unified in everything but name, Calimshan succeeded in defending against
the Black Horde in 1,235 DR, which was the first time that Calimshan had
ever been threatened by orcs. Saban's son had survived the Black Horde
and took his father's throne as Syl-Pasha, ensuring the progression of
the Djenispool dynasty. The dynasty's increasing use of magic solidified
their power but also allowed for the greater influence of the Twisted
Rune. However, those in society who could control their affairs such as
Pasha Pook were seen as bastions of stability in a chaotic land and this
perception exponentially increased their power.

As Tethyr fell to civil war, these 'bastions' kept Calimshan prosperous
until the Time of Troubles. The Darkstalker Wars allowed for the rise to
power of Ralan el Persakhal who surreptitiously overthrew the Djenispool
dynasty, exerting almost complete control over both the government and
the criminal underworld of Calimshan. \[It looked like Calimshan was on
the rise again but the Dracorage in 1,373 DR set into motion events that
allowed the other city-states to break free of the Syl-Pasha.

After the Spellplague, the Calimemnon Crystal, prison of the efreet
Memnon and the djinn Calim, shattered. The released creatures resumed
their hostilities that dated back to the First Era of Skyfire. In the
wake of the return of Calim and Memnon, many of the residents of
Calimshan, presumed to be human, cast off their long held disguises and
revealed themselves to be genasi. These descendants of the elemental
powers pledged themselves to either fire or air, took over the cities of
Memnon and Calimport respectively, and joined the war between the
efreets and djinns. The Second Era of Skyfire lasted until 1,450 DR when
both Memnon and Calim were banished back to Elemental Chaos by an
unknown event. They left in their wake a devastated Calimshan, torn by
the remaining genasi warlords. The genasi of Calimshan are notorious for
their treatment of humans as slaves and their constant fighting across
the Calim Desert. The events of the Second Era of Skyfire left the
metropolis of Suldolphor a blasted ruin where rogue djinn and efreets
still clash. As of 1,479 DR, the last bastion of order in the region
lies in the last human controlled city, the fortress of Almraiven. Once
an intellectual mecca and center of magical research, Almraiven
weathered the Spellplague and resisted its own genasi uprising.
Currently, the WeavePasha protects the city from the ravages of the war
that rages across the rest of the land, but his powers are waning.\]

The Marching Mountains define the northern borders of Calimshan while
the eastern boundary goes all the way to the Lake of Steam.

The population is varied, with humans making up the majority of its
citizens, but also dwarves settling in the Marching Mountains and elves
south of those mountains. Halflings, half-orcs and half-elves are not an
unusual sight in Calimshan either. Genies still exist here but are
enslaved for the most part, rare and coveted creatures. Religion plays
an important role in Calimshan life and history.

After Calim and his genie overlords were imprisoned, the mortal races
embraced the worship of gods other than Calim. Many worshipped angry,
vengeful gods in order to gain power quickly and stamp out the last
influence of the genies. Thus, for over seven millennia, the dark gods
had a foothold in the hearts and minds of many Calishites. There hasn’t
been any state-mandated religion since the fall of the Shoon imperium.
Other lands like Tethyr shun gods because of their evil practices.
Calimshan has a tolerance for all. It sees itself as the greatest land
on Faerûn because it accepts all creeds and religions. Plenty of
Calishites pay lip service to whatever god will help them in a
situation. If a more profound worship is deemed necessary, a shrine or
temple for nearly every major or minor power can be found in most
communities.

Calimshan citizens seek the acquisition of wealth. Where different from
Amn who seeks wealth for wealths sake, Calimshan seeks wealth to affor
luxuries for your particular life style. The pursuit of wealth is only
acceptable in order to reach a level of comfort where a person does not
have to work hard ever again. Magic is so predominant in Calimshan that
even the lowest of slaves is unimpressed by simple magics. Their views
of magic stem from its use to make everyday life easier; it has become
mundane through being used to perform common activities like serving
wine or cleaning a home.

The Calishites believe themselves to be the rightful heirs of all lands
south and west of the Sea of Fallen Stars. This birthright was passed
down to them by the genie lords that once ruled the land. Magic is
commonplace in Calishite culture. They truly believe they were the
beginning of civilization on the Sword Coast, if not Faerûn as a whole.
The north was controlled by savage barbarians for the longest time,
meanwhile the Calishite were building cities and empires.

## The Chondathans

Chondathans are merchants that shared an emphasis on exploration and
freedom. They look to better themselves and their families with gold. It
is said they conquered more land through trade and settlement than with
armies. The ancestry of these people can be traced back to the Twelve
Cities of Swords in ancient Jhaamdath, which was founded around -5,800
DR. High Mages from Nikerymath unleashed a tidal wave in -255 DR that
destroyed the Twelve Cities of Swords because of the aggressive
conquests of the Jhaamdathan people. It also changed the topography into
what it is known today. The humans were forced to leave and colonize
lands throughout Faerûn. The elves hoped to stop the humans but through
their actions helped spread humanity across Faerûn. More migrations
occurred throughout history and Chondathan culture was formed through
the generations that colonized the nearby lands. Around the year 1 DR, a
great number of Jhaamdath-descended Chondathans migrated west from
Impiltur. A portion of them settled in the valleys near the great forest
of Cormanthor, which came to be known as the Dalelands, while a second
group established roots in the region north of the Dragonmere and went
on to found the Forest Country in 26 DR under the leadership of House
Obarskyr. A third group left their ancient lands sometime around 380 DR
and settled the south-eastern shores of the Sea of Fallen Stars and
established a collection of colonies known as Chancelgaunt. In the next
few centuries, settlers from these heartlands continued further west and
began to colonize the Savage Frontier in northwest Faerûn. Although the
Calishites, the Imaskari, the Mulan and the Netherese each forged some
of the greatest human empires of Faerûn, it is the Chondathans whose
culture now dominates. This empire was spread by commerce and coin.

## The Damaran 

Damaran live in the regions of the Moonsea, Narfell, Thesk, and Damara
in northeastern Faerûn. These people are the living remnants of the
ancient Narfel, a kingdom ruled by evil priests that maintained their
power through blood-pacts with demon lords. This kingdom was destroyed
in -160 DR through a decade long war with Raumathar (another human
kingdom). Since the destruction the tribes merged with the Nar, Rashemi,
Chondathan and Sossrim people, creating the Damaran ethnic group. The
Church is central to the lives of the Damaran people. They take morality
very seriously and live a disciplined lifestile. No surprise they have a
strong affinity for divine magic and priestly lifestyles. Damarans held
close ties with their Chondathan cousins and the two ethnic groups were
often well-integrated into each others' societies. Generally speaking,
they were highly suspicious of elves, half-elves and half-orcs and were
averse towards the drow. Due to their historical conflict with the
demonic remnants of ancient Narfell, Damarans were outwardly hostile
towards tieflings. By the same token, fire genasi were treated in a
similar manner, as their mere existence was associated with the
much-maligned Red Wizards of Thay.

## The Illuskans

Also known as Northlanders, Illuskans are the seafaring warlike people
of the Sword Coast North. They reside in the High Forest, the Moonshae
Isles, Waterdeep, Illuskan and Uthgardt. For many years they have been
seen as a barbaric people. Many southerners associate them on the same
level as orcs. But they are strong robust people that farm, fish, and
mine the harsh lands of the north. It’s unclear when humans first
settled the islands of the Trackless Sea but it was in -3000 DR that
Illuskans first migrated to the Sword Coast founding the realm of
Illusk, present day Luskan. They originated from the island of Ruathym,
and from there they spread into other islands in the Sea of Swords and
into the continent. Early Illuskans learned rune magic from the giants.
They were barbaric and migratory which is reflected in their lives
today. Many take to the seas to explore, becoming fighters or rangers.
But bards are well known too, playing important roles as lore keepers
and poets, giving inspiration to Illuskan warbands.

## The Mulan

The Mulan make their home in Mulhorand, Thay, Unther, and Chondalwood.
The history of the Mulan is largely the same as the history of
Mulhorand, Unther, Chessenta, and Thay. They were once slaves in the
Imaskar Empire who had brought the Mulan to Faerûn through portals. The
Mulan worship the Mulhorandi pantheon, which are Egyptian gods. Their
gods were prevented from aiding their worshipers on Faerûn by a barrier.
With the help of Ao they were able to circumvent this barrier and
defeated the Imaskari. Since the fall of the Imaskari by the mortal
avatars of the slaves’ deities, the Mulan have dominated the eastern
shores of the Sea of Fallen Stars. After millennia of rulership, the
Mulan have become arrogant and highly resistant to change. They believe
their culture is superior to all others, believing strongly in the
values of order and discipline. There are disagreements within their
culture as to which kind of magic to pursue, arcane or divine. The
god-king rulership led to the development of a powerful priest class.
The group that followed a more arcane direction struggled under their
heavy-handed rule and eventually rebelled. They would migrate to Thay,
forming the empire of Red Wizards.

## The Rashemi

The Rashemi hail from the northeastern reaches of Faerûn. From the
region of Rashemen they also inhabit Thesk, Thay, and Aglarond. The
Rashemi are descendants of nomadic tribes. They existed before the fall
of the Imaskar Empire, living out their lives in Rashemen. They were
warlike and resisted the Mulhorandi efforts to take their lands. Then
the Orcgate Wars occurred between -1,075 to -1,069 DR, and the first
empire of the Mulhorand hires the Rashemi as mercenaries. After the war
the Mulhorandi pulled back from the north leaving an opening for the
Rashemi to establish new empires. Two empires were created that warred
with one another over territory. This came to an end with the
destruction of both empires. One army at the hand of an avatar of
Kossuth, and the other army led by a demon lord, Eltab. The demon Eltab
would rule the lands for a time. Then the Witches of Rashemen arrived in
-82 DR near Lake Tirulag, a clandestine order of masked witches, a
sisterhood to preserve the empire’s magical lore, who aligned with the
native Rashemi in -75 DR. They, in alliance with the barbarians, would
overthrow Eltab and form the nation of Rashemen. Partially because of
their history, their view of life had become an unending series of
challenges to be faced and overcome. Strong emphasis is placed on
strength, either physical or magical. Respect must be earned in Rashemi
culture. By the late 14th century DR, the Rashemi were the most numerous
human ethnic group on the Priador plateau of Thay and in Rashemen.
Minority groups could be found throughout the surrounding regions as
well. Rashemi thought of themselves as inhabitants of a harsh and
beautiful land ruled by spirits and rarely displayed the arrogance of
other human ethnic groups. Children were expected to earn their place in
the world, rather than having it handed to them, and they viewed life as
a series of challenges to face and defeat.

## The Tethyrian

Tethyrians are native to Tethyr and the surrounding areas. They have
been conquered numerous times by other humans and thus their culture is
a melting pot of Calishite, Chondathan, Illuskan, and Low Netherese.
They compose the majority of the lower classes, especially in Calimshan.
Warfare throughout their history has hardened them and Tethyrians make
excellent fighters and rogues. They have an oral history, which
encourages bards as well to keep the stories retold. Tethyrians started
out as a regular human tribe living along the Sword Coast. The Genie
Lords brought Calishites with them and the nation of Calimshan was
created. The Tethyrians were absorbed into this and subjugated.
Rebellion occurred within Calishite rule and by -370 DR the clans were
forced to defend their independence on numerous occasions, culminating
in the crowning of their first king in -212 DR. Freedom is the most
precious gift to a Tethyrian. They have struggled and survived together
so much to be Tethyrian is to be part of a family. Loyalty to one’s kin
and neighbor and generosity to those in need are important aspects of
Tethyrian society. A Tethyrian fighter would rather wield a sentimental
blade carried by his grandfather than a new one crafted for him. They
have strong ties to arcane and divine magic, and bardcraft is revered
with its people.

## The Turami

The Turami were native to the region around the Alamber Sea. After the
fall of the Imaskar Empire, the Mulan migrated west and displaced the
native Turami who were driven along the southeastern coast of the Sea of
the Fallen Stars. They eventually settled and founded the nation of
Turmish around -37 DR, a nation of mercantile cities ruled by its
Assembly of Stars, representatives of each of its cities in a
parliamentary democracy. With a few small exceptions, such as the Plague
of Dragons in 1,317 DR for example, Turmish had grown into a democratic
nation that was peaceful, safe and content, if occasionally a little
overcrowded. The Spellplague changed Turmish's fortunes for the worse,
as the Sea of Fallen Stars drained away, leaving Alaghôn's port miles
from the new shoreline. It is the birthplace of the Emerald Enclave,
which has proudly taken credit for the rebirth of Turmishan agriculture,
the cessation of the Great Rain that plagued the region a few years ago,
and the restoration of the god Lathander. The Turmians are known for
respecting their land. They often buried valuables, partly as gifts to
Chauntea and partly as "seeds" to grow future wealth. It was frowned
upon to be found digging in Turmish. They usually wore chalk marks on
their foreheads to announce their personal abilities and level of
education. If one couldn't prove their ability to read, write or use
magic, as indicated by the dots, the punishment might be death.

## The Shou

To most people of Faerûn, Kara-Tur is like another world. The gods that
humans worship in Faerûn are unknown here, as are common peoples such as
gnomes and orcs. Other dragons, neither chromatic nor metallic, dwell in
the its lands and fly its skies. And its mages practice forms of magic
mysterious even to archwizards of Faerûn. The Shou are one of the many
human ethnic groups in far-off Kara-Tur. They come from the lands of
Shou Lung; of the great empire raised in the name of the dragon, a proud
people with honor and tradition. By 1,360 DR, many Shou migrated to
THesk and other lands of Faerûn. After migrating, many have held onto
their culture which brought a sense of wonder amongst to some of the
other people of Faerûn. There is a major Shou city in Faerûn called
Xiousing in Marsember, founded in 1,419 DR when the waters of the Sea of
Fallen Stars receded. Many have intermarried with other humans but have
held onto their cultural heritage from Kara-Tur. The Shou language, High
Shou, used the Draconic alphabet.

## The Arkaiun 

The Arkaiun resides primarily in Dambrath but also in Halruaa and the
Shaar. Their culture was formed through the interbreeding of Nar
refugees from Shandaular and Illuskan tribes. The Arkaiuns could trace
their origins to the fall of the city of Shandaular in Ashanath in the
far north in −946 DR. Refugees from the city fled through a portal to
the Council Hills area in the Shaar. Their king, Arkaius the Archmage,
remained behind to close the portal, and it is from Arkaius that they
supposedly took their name. For several centuries, the Arkaiuns roamed
the Council Hills region, interbreeding with a lost tribe of Illuskans.
They would be captured and enslaved by the drow after their discovery of
the Underdark sometime in the ninth century DR.

**The Bedine  
**A proud, warlike race from the southern Aunaroch regions but
concentrated in the region known as the Sword. In -339 DR, a group of
humans emigrated from Zakhara using a portal. They intermingled with the
populace of the ancient Netherese cities, and over time the combined
culture became what was called the Bedine. Most folk of the Realms had
no idea that the Bedine even existed, and those who did rarely could
understand the difficult conditions of survival that drove them to live
the way that they did. They were never unified enough to be a threat to
nearby Cormyr, the Dalelands, or Hill's Edge. The Bedine were once
divided into over 100 tribes with the largest having more than 300
members. Each tribe was ruled by a sheikh, whose word was law. After the
second rise of the Netherese Empire at the end of the 14th century DR,
when the Spellplague restored the Anauroch to the fertile lands it once
was, the Bedine were subjugated by the Netherese and forcefully
integrated into their society. Over the next few generations, they
gradually became city dwellers, abandoning their nomadic ways. In 1,485
DR, the Bedine rebelled against the Netherese, after a war with Cormyr
had thinned out Netheril's forces. Within a few years, the Netherese
Empire had been destroyed for the second time in history, and in 1,488
DR, the Bedine battled with Netheril's surviving forces over a site
known as Memory Spire. This conflict accidentally unleashed a horde of
phaerimm, who once again wreaked havoc on the lands below with their
life-draining magics. Honor was prime among the Bedine's beliefs—more
important than life itself. Killing was not looked down upon as harshly
as by other cultures. Life was harsh and death was common; thus, if it
were pragmatic to do so, killing another human might be little different
than killing an animal. Despite their violence amongst each other, the
Bedine tended toward law and goodness. They would usually offer a chance
to surrender to an outlander enemy, not out of mercy, but because of a
belief that men without honor could not lose it. Despite their initial
opinions, it was possible to change most Bedine's minds by demonstrating
one's honor through both word and action. A typical Bedine feared all
things magical, considering it both dishonorable and to be feared. In
fact, tribes would outcast anyone casting magic, with a minor exception
for small divine healing spells, which were seen as "favor of the gods."

**The Ffolk**  
The Ffolk inhabited the Moonshae Isles, the first in 140 DR, alongside
the Northlanders. The first Ffolk to appear on the Moonshae Isles were
members of the lost tribes of Talfir who fled Ebenfar to escape the
Shadowking Verraketh. They inhabit the southern parts of the Moonshaes,
including Flamsterd, Moray, Snowdown, and Sunset, and the southern parts
of Alaron and Gwynneth. They controlled the isles up until an invasion
by Illuskans forced them to concede the northern section of the isles in
256 DR. Their society was mainly agricultural and was ruled by a High
King or Queen who resided in Caer Callidyrr, the capital of the Ffolk.
Modern Ffolk were mostly of Tethyrian origin, following a large
Tethyrian immigration in 467 DR. This caused the Ffolk to lose much of
their original racial heritage, although their culture was quite
distinct from their mainland cousins and they held to a strong druidic
tradition. In 621 DR, Ffolk colonized the Utter East and enslaved the
native Mar of the area, carving it up into the Five Kingdoms.

**The Gurs**  
The Gurs, also known as Selûne's Children or the people of the highway,
were a nomadic human people believed by scholars to be mainly of Rashemi
descent because of their strong similarity with the natives of Rashemen.
They were also likely to have acquired ancestry among other ethnicities
on their travels. Fragments of lore originating from the period around
the first-century Dale Reckoning could be found that described the Gurs
as a group of nomads. What was known of the early Gurs suggested that
they were refugees fleeing the long-ago war between Raumathar and
Narfell. They live in the Western Heartlands of Faerûn in the
14<sup>th</sup> and late 15<sup>th</sup> century DR, divided into two
distinct cultures – those who traveled throughout the Western Heartlands
and those living in the Endless Wastes. A few settled in some of the
poorer sections of cities such as Baldur's Gate, Elturel, and Iriaebor.

<span class="mark">(I got lazy lol will flesh out later or do it
yourself ya dingus)</span>

Abbalayar, a group of humans who lived within a secluded city on Mount
Abbalayat, within the Marching Mountains of Calimshan.

Bavanese and Bertanese, the island inhabitants of Bawa and Bertan in
Kara-Tur

Bawani, an ethnic group also native to the island of Bawa

Chultans, tribal folk that lived in the eponymous jungle

Durpari, the swarthy followers of the Adama along the coasts of the
Golden Water

Halruaans, decedents of Netheril that settled in the Shining South

Imaskari, a people whose ancestors hailed from the fabled Old Imaskar

Itzas, an offshoot of the Payit people who lived in relative peace and
serenity

Lantanna, the copper-skinned worshippers of Gond

Nars, nomadic tribes of traders from the grasslands east of the
Giantspire Mountains

Netherese, the pure-blood remnants of the ancient civilization were
scattered across Faerûn

Northlanders, the war-ready sea-faring people of the northern Moonshae
Isles

Nubari, a tall and brown-skinned shamanistic tribe of the Malatran
Plateau

Raumvirans, the descendants of the Raumviran Empire settled along the
coast of the Lake of Mists

Pazruki, shepherding tribes who hailed from the Koryaz Mountains

Purang, Kara-turans native to the land of Purang in Malatra

Shaarans, the darks-skinned nomadic hunters of the Shaar

Sossrim, a silver-haired people who lived in the frozen lands near the
Great Glacier

Tashalans, people that escaped the bondage of the Sarrukh

Tuigan, the 15 nomadic tribes that wandered the vast Hordelands between
Faerûn and Kara-Tur

Ulutiuns, an ethnic group of tribal Kara-Tur who traveled across the
north pole of Toril to the Endless Ice Sea

Vaasans, descendants of Netheril that settled around the Moonsea region

# The Era of Upheaval (1,358 DR)

This period began with the event known as the Time of Troubles. Not
content with their status, the deities Bane and Myrkul tried to steal
the Tablets of Fate from the overdeity Ao. Their idea was to rewrite the
Pantheon and put themselves in the position of more power. They were
able to take the tablets, hiding them somewhere on Faerûn.

Ao, angry at the gods for their habitual pursuit of power and negligence
toward their mortal faithful, summoned all the deities of Toril and cast
them down from their otherworldly domains to wander the Realms as
mortals. All but one, Helm, who was selected to protect the gates to the
heavens, not letting anyone through until the tablets were found and
returned. During this dark period magic becomes unpredictable and the
prayers of the faithful go unanswered. Divine magic ceased to function
altogether, unless they were close to their deity’s avatar. Arcane magic
ceased to be regulated by Mystra and became dangerously unpredictable.

Mystra wanted to return to the Astral Sea through the celestial stairway
but was stopped by Helm. She argued with Helm, saying that she had
nothing to do with the theft and to let her pass so she could speak with
Lord Ao herself and regain her position to protect the Weave. Helm
stayed true to his task and refused. Furious, Mystra attacked Helm with
fire in her mouth, but she posed no threat against Helm in her avatar
form. With his gauntleted fist he punched Mystra, exploding and killing
her, causing more damage to the Weave.

Bane, greater god of tyranny, strife and hatred, a member of the Dead
Three, hid one of the tablets in the city of Tantras, where the god Torm
the True had manifested. They would end up having a titanic battle where
Torm absorbed the souls of thousands of his willing faithful to
strengthen himself. Both gods slew each other and left parts of the city
destroyed as well as turning it into a massive dead magic zone.

Bhaal, intermediate god of murder, a member of the Dead Three, was slain
by the young mortal Cyric with the sword Godsbane. This sword was the
chosen form that the god Mask, Lord of Shadows, took during the Time of
Troubles. Cyric thereby inherited the profile of Bhaal, eventually
becoming a deity. However, Bhaal had foreseen his own death, and had
populated Faerûn with his progeny, the Bhaalspawn, in a bid to resurrect
himself.

Myrkul, god of the dead, was killed in a duel with Midnight, who at the
time was wielding the powers of Mystra through an amulet given to her by
the deity. With his death the effort of collecting the tablets
succeeded.

Even though Ao had decreed that none of the gods fallen during this time
should be reinstated, Torm was resurrected by Ao because he died
fulfilling his obligations of his portfolio. Midnight was chosen to
replace the destroyed Mystra, restoring magic to Toril. She took the
name of Mystra to avoid confusion. Cyric obtained Bhaal’s portfolio, and
Bane’s portfolio was divided among Cyric and Bane’s half-demon son,
Iyachtu Xvim. Bane eventually came back ten years later when Xvim was
consumed by green fire from within that resurrected Bane. Before Myrkul
died he infused a crown with the remains of his sentience and teleported
it away, an artifact known as the Crown of Horns. It created in -2,237
DR by a netherese archwizard and later altered by Myrkul in 1,358 DR in
his avatar form.

Lord Ao let the gods resume their duties from their otherworldly
domains. He also lifted the barrier that prevented the Mulhorandi gods
from reuniting with their divine selves.

Ao also changed the way divine powers worked. A deity’s power was now
directly tied to their worshippers, so more faithful worshippers meant a
more powerful deity. This would also lead them to care more for their
followers rather fighting with each other.

Kelemvor, a sullen adventurer and companion of Cyric and Midnight, was
killed by Cyric with Godsbane during the fight with Myrkul, but his soul
was hidden by Mask inside the sword. Cyric wanted to become the only
deity in the Realms after the Time of Troubles and the first thing he
wanted to accomplish was to have Kelemvor's soul so that he could gain
an advantage over the new Mystra, his most hated rival, and whose
portfolio over magic he coveted. However, for ten years, Cyric and his
church were unable to find Kelemvor's soul, every divination and spell
they tried yielded nothing. Mask used Kelemvor's soul to gain the
cooperation of Mystra, all the while planning a revolt in the City of
Death against Cyric. With the help of Mystra, Torm, Oghma, and Cyric's
own high priest Fzoul Chembryl (whose loyalty lay with the dead Bane),
great chaos was caused in two of Cyric's most important bases of faith:
Zhentil Keep and the City of Death. A great number of Cyric's followers
lost their faith, thus greatly weakening Cyric himself. Without the will
to control the City of Death, dead spirits were freed and roamed about
the City. In addition, Cyric's nightmare was freed from Dendar the Night
Serpent, and the dream found Cyric, causing him to think that Kelemvor
had somehow returned to life and to seek revenge. At that moment, Cyric,
though a Greater Power, lost his mind and crushed his sword, which freed
Kelemvor, and made his nightmare come true. The two fought, a dead soul
against a god. Cyric's fear, indecision, and madness became his defeat,
and Kelemvor finally managed to overthrow Cyric's rule in the City. By
the wish of all dead spirits and Denizens in the Gray Wastes, in 1368 DR
Kelemvor became the new God of Death. To be the Lord of the Dead is to
be the judgment of the departed souls. Kelemvor wished to clear all the
corruptions in the Realms of Death brought by former Lords of Death.
While faithful souls would be claimed by their respective deities,
faithless souls and those with a false faith that his or her god did not
want, were judged before the God of Death.

Another thing that happened at the conclusion of the Time of Troubles
was that Lord Ao destroyed the Tablets of Fate. They did not only hold
the name and portfolios of primordials and gods, but also the laws of
Realmspace. This resulted in the worlds of Abeir and Toril, separated
since the Tearfall, starting to join once again.

Then, in 1,385 DR, Cyric, aided by Shar, murdered the goddess Mystra in
Dwemer Heart. This act ripped asunder the Weave, unleashing its raw
power in a catastrophe known as the Spellplague. This accelerated the
fusion of Abeir and Toril, and whole regions and even continents where
exchanged between the two worlds.

Shar’s plan was to seize control of the weave upon Mystra’s death but
the Weave collapsed so completely that Shar not only failed to gather up
its fraying threads but she also lost control of the Shadow Weave. There
was a loss of cohesion with the Astral Plane, reshaping it into an
amorphous Astral Sea. The domains of the gods went flying freely,
merging with one another, splitting apart, or just being destroyed
entirely. One such dominion, Dwemer Heart, the home of Mystra, was
shattered at once, killing the deity Severus who lived there. The deity
Azuth was hurled into the Nine Hells where he was devoured by Asmodeus,
who then stole his divine essence. <span class="mark">With his new found
godly power, Asmodeus took advantage of the planar instability to hurl
the Abyss to the Elemental Chaos in an attempt to end the Blood War.
Asmodeus failed, however, as throwing the Abyss into the Chaos did not
stop the Blood War, although it was stalled by a hundred years.</span>
NEEDS TO BE RE-WRITTEN TO COINCIDE WITH THE DAWN AGE.

More gods died and others simply vanished. Some gods were revealed to be
aspects of others or not gods at all but primordials, while a few gods
were so weakened after the chaos that they were subsumed by other gods
of similar nature, or became exarchs under the service of more powerful
gods. Interloper deities began to migrate to the sphere of Abeir-Toril,
as well.

Cyric was found guilty of Mystra’s murder and was imprisoned for
eternity.

Shar also combined the Plane of Shadow with parts of the negative energy
planes and created the Shadowfell, which touched all parts of Toril.

On Toril, the Spellplague was a blue fire that engulfed everything. They
spread across Toril like a raging forest fire where there were magic.
Thousands of spellcasters were either destroyed or went insane. Many who
survived lost their ability to use arcane magic. It was through a planar
gate that the Spellplage spread to Abeir and parts of that world was
then transported into Toril. This is how the Dragonborn race came to
Toril.

The landscape on Toril was reshaped by cutting crevasses, parts of the
earth would break apart and float by themselves (known as earthmotes), a
huge rift opened in the Sea of Fallen Stars causing the water level to
drop, Chult became an island, Evermeet was pushed into the Feywild, and
the Shaar became a wasteland. The blue flame killed whatever it touched.

The political upheaval continued in the world. New nations were created,
while older ones, like Myth Drannor, were restored. The major political
crisis of the late years of the 14th century DR were the conquering of
Sembia by the Netherese and the fall of the zulkirs in Thay.

This event would last for 10 years. By 1,395 DR the majority of effects
came to an end, and arcane magic had returned to some normality. There
were many areas of dead or wild magic zones. Spellcasters retaught
themselves how to cast magic in this new world. Areas still affected by
the Spellplage were referred to as Plaguelands.

In 1,482 DR Lord Ao began the Second Sundering as a way to restore the
worlds of Toril and Abeir of the ravages of the Spellplague.

Many gods started creating what came to be referred to as “chosen” among
the mortals. They wanted to gather as many worshipers and thus power to
increase their ranking before Lord Ao completed the new Tablets of Fate,
which would seal their status and portfolios. These chosen had special
powers and were directly influenced by their deity.

The Great Rain started around the Sea of Fallen Stars. It rained for an
entire year and caused the waters to rise back to their pre-Spellplague
levels.

The Host Tower of the Arcane in Luskan came back, which kept the
primordial in check that woke up and destroyed Neverwinter. It was
destroyed in 1,376 DR and then rebuilt in 1,487 DR to quiet the
primordial back into slumber.

Major earthquakes and volcanoes occurred as Abeir separated from Toril
once again. Areas consumed by large chasms were restored to their
pre-Spellplague status.

Ships from continents previously thought lost were arriving on the
mainland once more.

Evermeet was restored to Toril.

A vestige of Mystra survived her death in 1,385 DR and was guiding a
chosen to aid in her renewal. The Simbul was tasked with closing
multiple rifts in the Weave and in doing so she absorbed much silverfire
and blue flame. The Simbul gifted this energy to Elminster who then
returned it to Mystra.

The new Mystra was a combination of Mystra, Midnight, and Mystryl,
drawing from memories that were left in the Weave. Her renewal marked
the end of the Spellplague.

Many deities thought dead or missing returned to life or re-emerged.
Helm, Mask, Lathande, Bhaal, and the previously lost Drow gods came
back. Azuth returned to the Faerûn Pantheon when Asmodeus freed him in
exchange for a divine spark so that he could become a deity by himself.

Mimicking the cosmic chaos, the political landscape of the world became
tumultuous as well. The Tuigan invasion, the Twelfth Serôs War, the
return of Netheril, the last Rage of Dragons, among other huge political
conflicts happened in less than thirty years.

When the Second Sundering ended, in 1,489 DR, Lord Ao decreed the end of
the Era of Upheaval.

The current year is 1,492 DR.
